---
title: "Another Story"
---

It's the last day of the sprint and the story you've been working on for two sprints
now is teasing you with it's completion. It's _pretty much_ done. The server
currently returns a 500 status code in cases when it should really be a 404, but
that's because of how the middleware is currently set up. The front end though. The
front end is solid. Well, except for that one field that displays it's validation
errors in a way that doesn't align with all the other validation errors, but it's
unlikely that _your_ changes caused that issue. Other than those things, and a few
other really minor issues, you could probably "call this story done".

After all, unpicking the mess that is the server side middleware could be _another
story_. You could even add the <code class="language-csharp">tech-debt</code> tag to
the JIRA issue you create so no one will accidentally think it's important. As far as
the front end validation goes, you're pretty sure there is already a story in one of
the backlogs for that. Well at least something similar, and surely whoever picks up
that story will fix this alignment issue as well. Maybe you should find the story and
add a comment. Would it be in JIRA backlog 1 or 2? Or maybe it's in that Excel
spreadsheet that the BA made because there were no more JIRA seats left when they
started. You could also just write it on a bit of coffee-stained paper, put it in a
bottle, and throw it in the ocean.

It really would be nice to get those 3 story points counted in this sprint's total.
Those imaginary units, plus the other imaginary units already completed, would add up
to a bigger number of imaginary units. Everyone knows that bigger is better,
especially when it comes imagination. The importance of imagination in project
planning and reporting can not be overstated.

Would it be nice to fix those issues? _Of course_ it would. Could you fix those
issues?  _Of course_ you could. You are a really smart programmer. Probably the best
programmer in the office, except for maybe that Russian guy who never talks to
anyone, but you're pretty sure he is a spy. You are definitely the best non-spy
programmer in the office.  Unless your imposter syndrome is playing up on account of
you having too much gluten today, in which case you should spend the rest
of the day figuring out which meal delivery service pays the most because that's all
you're good for and everyone else already knows it. The fact it's taken you so long
to realise this can only confirms the voluminous nature of your stupidity.

The fixes probably wouldn't even take that long. But the tests take 17 minutes to run
and the build only passes every 3rd run, for some apparently unimportant reason. You're
looking at maybe 51 minutes until your PR would be merge-able again and it's
currently 4:10pm.

Yeah, the server side middleware improvement _should_ be another story. It's the
_professional_ thing to do.
